---
title: Organizing and hosting a small LAN Party
author: f4814n
teaser: This is a teaser
---

# Preface: Why a LAN Party?
> There's nothing better than staying up all night playing videogames with your friends. Everyone craming
> into a small basement, ten or more gaming PCs pumping out heat, and more cold cathodes lighting up the
> place than you can shake a stick at. If this sounds like a fun evening to you, but you don't know where
> to start, let me help you out.
>
> ~ [lanpartyguide.com](http://lanpartyguide.com/lansetup.html)

Back in the 90's and early 2000's LAN Parties were a thing because there were no online games (apparently,
I'm too young to remember that time) but with the rise of online gaming and things like voice chat the
"need" for them has decreased.
Why would you want to organize or visit a LAN Party when (almost) every game can be played online?
Personally I find the atmosphere at a LAN Party is something you can not experience alone (even if you use
voice chat). (And I am not somebody who remembers visiting LAN Parties back in the 2000's, so going there
is definitely not just about nostalgia).

So if you find that idea exciting but have no idea where to start this post should give you the basic ideas.

# Organisation
Like all events with more than 3 people hosting a LAN Party takes a decent amount of preparation, or it
will most certainly be a flop. Organizing such an event is not hard but you should think of some things: [more]

## People
You will need some people to invite to your Party (no shit). You should ask them (and yourself) whether they
will enjoy such an event (somebody who does not like computers or hates gaming is probably not a good fit).
The thing about LAN Parties is that - depending on the games you play - that everybody has to get along with
each other, otherwise you will not be able to play any kind of game that forces the players to interact (in
real life) with each other. Also people who randomly decide "I don't want to play this game" can be very
annoying, if they prevent you from playing a certain game (seriously people, don't be a dick and play what
everyone else wants to play).

## Games
Once you have decided whom to invite, you will have to decide which games to play. Choosing different games
of different genres is a good idea, so you can switch games during the Party (playing only a single game
for one or even two days is apt to get boring). While choosing the games, keep in mind that they have to
provide a multiplayer mode and should fit the number of attendees. If your Internet Connection is very slow
you should only choose games which provide a "Offline" or "LAN" mode, otherwise you will experience Lags and
very high pings. [langameslist.com](http://www.langamelist.com/) provides a neat overview and can be a great
help. [Dedicated server]

The games me and my friends enjoy most are:

* Trouble in Terrorist Town (TTT) (A dedicated Garry's Mod server is necessary)
* Quake III

## Networking & other Tech stuff
A LAN Party without (or with a malfunctioning) LAN is bad. So you will either have to setup and troubleshoot
the network yourself or invite someone who is able (and willing) to do it for you. If you want to have a
good and stable network, I *strongly* recommend buying a switch (they are not too costly - at least not the
ones you need for less than 16 People). Personally I bought a 16-Port Gigabit Switch for my LAN Parties and
it was worth it.

I will not dive into details about networking here. For help with a LAN Party network you should either look
at [lanpartyguide.com](http://lanpartyguide.com/lansetup.html) or
[the r/LanParty Wiki](https://www.reddit.com/r/lanparty/wiki/networking) or just use your favourite search
engine to get all the information you need (and much more).

If you intend to watch a movie or something similar you should set up a monitor (or TV) everybody can
comfortably look at.  You should also be able to solve basic computer problems (like disabling a firewall
and so on). I have never attended a LAN Party with no computer problems to fix.

## Space & Food
Obviously, you will need to provide enough space for everybody invited (and their equipment). A small room
with one or two tables will do in most cases. Keep in mind that you have to ventilate your room (otherwise
all those computers and people will heat up your room and fill it with a pleasant scent). Remember that you
will have to sleep somewhere (I assume you will do the event overnight).

A problem I heard about (although I have never encountered this issue) is that you should not plug too many
computers on a single fuse to prevent it from blowing up.
[lanpartyguide.com](http://lanpartyguide.com/lansetup.html) recommends putting not more than three computers
on a single 15A fuse (This probably depends on your country).

Having enough food and drink is important too. You can buy as much snacks as you want but you will need
"real" (i.e normal/more healthy) food too. (This might not be the case if you LAN Party is really short, but
for anything longer than approximately eight hours this is very important)

# During the event
If your preparation was good, you should be able to spend most of your time gaming/eating/whatever. Just
remember that you will never be able to completely get rid of problems. [okay?]

# Advice from me
Here is a list with some advice I consider worth sharing:

* Fellow Linux Users: If you need Windows you should not install it on the fly.

  I once tried to install Windows on my Laptop *at* the LAN Party I attended. It took some hours and I was
  unable to do any gaming for a big part of the event.

* Prepare a Windows installation Stick

  Reinstalling Windows is often easier than fixing strange problems

* File Distribution

  If you intend to play games that have to be installed via a setup `.exe` (and not via steam or whatever)
  and that not everybody has installed, you should use [D-LAN](http://d-lan.net). D-LAN makes file-sharing
  inside your network easy. And it is fast (with six people I observed ~100 MB/s using my Gigabit Switch)
